# PlanOut

PlanOut is a Python-based toolkit and language for online field experimentation. PlanOut was created to make it easy to run more sophisticated experiment and to quickly iterate on these experiments, while satisfying the constraints of running as part of a large Internet service. The package provides methods for assigning values to parameters --- for example, for randomly assigning users to a parameter controlling the color of a button with different probabilities. An experimental design is defined by using one or more *operators* to set parameters that control your Internet service. The parameters each input (e.g., user) is assigned to is completely determnisitic. These experiments can be specified in only a few lines of code.


This release currently includes:
  * An extensible class for defining experiments. This class comes objects that make it easy to implement randomized assignments, and automatically logs key data according to best practices developed at Facebook.
  * An extensible class for managing multiple mutually exclusive frameworks.
  * The reference implementation of the PlanOut interpreter, which executes serialized code generated by the PlanOut domain specific language.
  
### Who is PlanOut for?
The package can be used as a turn-key solution for students and researchers running or learning how to run experiments. It can also be useful as-as for startups.  The software is also designed to be extended for use in production environments for larger services, such as those run by startups.


### Example

Here is an example of how to use PlanOut. To create a basic PlanOut experiment, you subclass ``SimpleExperiment`` object, and implement an assignment method. You can use PlanOut's random assignment operators by setting ``e.varname``, where ``params`` is the first argument passed to the ``assign()`` method, and ``varname`` is the name of the variable you are setting.
```python

from planout.experiment import SimpleExperiment
from planout.ops.random import *

class FirstExperiment(SimpleExperiment):
  def assign(self, params, userid):
    params.button_color = UniformChoice(choices=['#ff0000', '#00ff00'], unit=userid)
    params.button_text = WeightedChoice(
        choices=['Join now!', 'Sign up.'],
        weights=[0.3, 0.7], unit=userid)

my_exp = FirstExperiment(userid=12)
# parameters may be accessed via the . operator
print my_exp.get('button_text'), my_exp.get('button_color')

# experiment objects include all input data
for i in xrange(6):
  print FirstExperiment(userid=i)
```

which outputs (update this):

```
Sign up. #ff0000
{'inputs': {'userid': 0}, 'salt': 'firstexperiment', 'name': 'firstexperiment', 'params': {'button_color': '#00ff00', 'button_text': 'Sign up.'}}
{'inputs': {'userid': 1}, 'salt': 'firstexperiment', 'name': 'firstexperiment', 'params': {'button_color': '#ff0000', 'button_text': 'Join now!'}}
{'inputs': {'userid': 2}, 'salt': 'firstexperiment', 'name': 'firstexperiment', 'params': {'button_color': '#00ff00', 'button_text': 'Sign up.'}}
{'inputs': {'userid': 3}, 'salt': 'firstexperiment', 'name': 'firstexperiment', 'params': {'button_color': '#ff0000', 'button_text': 'Sign up.'}}
{'inputs': {'userid': 4}, 'salt': 'firstexperiment', 'name': 'firstexperiment', 'params': {'button_color': '#ff0000', 'button_text': 'Sign up.'}}
{'inputs': {'userid': 5}, 'salt': 'firstexperiment', 'name': 'firstexperiment', 'params': {'button_color': '#00ff00', 'button_text': 'Join now!'}}
```

The ``SimpleExperiment`` class will automatically the name of the experiment, ``FirstExperiment``, variable name, and the input data (``userid``) are used to perform the random assignment.  Parameter assignments and inputs are automatically logged into a file called ``firstexperiment.log'``.


### Learn more
Learn more about PlanOut by [reading the PlanOut paper](http://www-personal.umich.edu/~ebakshy/planout.pdf). You can cite PlanOut as "Designing and Deploying Online Field Experiments". Eytan Bakshy, Dean Eckles, Michael S. Bernstein. Proceedings of the 23rd ACM conference on the World Wide Web. April 7–11, 2014, Seoul, Korea, or by copying and pasting the bibtex below:
``` bibtex
@inproceedings{bakshy2014www,
	Author = {Bakshy, E. and Eckles, D. and Bernstein, M.S.},
	Booktitle = {Proceedings of the 23rd ACM conference on the World Wide Web},
	Organization = {ACM},
	Title = {Designing and Deploying Online Field Experiments},
	Year = {2014}}
```
