---
id: interpreter
title: The PlanOut interpreter
layout: docs
permalink: /docs/interpreter.html
next: serialization.html
---

Most of the materials for this package are focused around a way of interacting
with PlanOut using pure Python.  But another way to execute PlanOut experiments
is via an interpreter which reads in simple, nested expressions, encoded as
JSON, and emits output data similar to what you see with the prior examples.

PlanOut interpreter code is primarily generated through a domain-specific language
This language resembles JavaScript, except it only contains fewer primitives.
Interpreter code takes the place of `assign()` methods in experiment classes.

## Introduction to the PlanOut language
The sample experiment from the [Getting started](getting-started.html)
tutorial could be written as follows:

```
button_color = uniformChoice(choices=["#ff0000", "#00ff00"], unit=userid);
button_text = uniformChoice(choices=["I'm voting", "I'm a voter"], unit=userid);
```

Besides difference in syntax, you can immediately notice two things:

 * You don't need to set random variables via the `params.var = value` pattern
 * Random assignment operators start with lower case variables.


Using the [PlanOut compiler](http://facebook.github.io/planout/demo/planout-compiler.html),
the above PlanOut language code can be compiled into JSON:

```json
{
  "op": "seq",
  "seq": [
    {
      "op": "set",
      "var": "button_color",
      "value": {
        "choices": {
          "op": "array",
          "values": [
            "#ff0000",
            "#00ff00"
          ]
        },
        "unit": {
          "op": "get",
          "var": "userid"
        },
        "op": "uniformChoice"
      }
    },
    {
      "op": "set",
      "var": "button_text",
      "value": {
        "choices": {
          "op": "array",
          "values": [
            "I'm voting",
            "I'm a voter"
          ]
        },
        "unit": {
          "op": "get",
          "var": "userid"
        },
        "op": "uniformChoice"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

## Is the PlanOut interpreter right for you?
### Pros
 - Use of the [limited vocabulary](planout-language.html) means that your experiments are kept simple.
  Because PlanOut is not Turing complete, and each argument takes some optional
  and required parameters specified a priori, it's easy to check that your
  program will run, and not get caught in any loops.

 - Experiment definitions are [serialized](serialization.html),
  so they can easily be stored in databases, sent across networks, and executed
  on multiple platforms, including
  interpreters written in different languages. In fact, the same code that
  executes in the open-source Python version of PlanOut produces the same
  assignments as the PHP version of PlanOut used internally at Facebook.

 - Experiments can be constructed via graphical interfaces, rather than code.


### Cons
 - Using the interpreter requires that you compile your code into
 serialized JSON format, or use a graphical user interface to construct
 experiments
 - Use of the interpreter makes the most sense when you have a database set up
 to store experiment definitions. This can be overkill for ad hoc experiments,
 such as those run for a single study students and researchers at a university.
