---
id: planout-language
title: The PlanOut language
layout: docs
permalink: /docs/planout-language.html
prev: testing.html
next: getting-started-with-the-interpreter.html
---

While much this guide is focused on nuts-and-bolts of the native Python-based
API, PlanOut is first and formost intended to be a parsimonious, high-level
language for thinking about and specifying complex experiments in a way that is
useful researchers as well as engineers building production systems.

### The PlanOut language as a way of serializing experiments
PlanOut language code gets compiled into a JSON representation which can be stored and retrieved at runtime.
This aspect is key to scaling up an organization's experimentation infrastructure.

For example, the a 2x2 factorial design with unequal probability weights can be
expressed in a two line script written the PlanOut domain-specific language:

```python
button_text = uniformChoice(choices=['Purchase', 'Buy'], unit=userid);
has_discount = bernoulliTrial(p=0.3, unit=userid);
```

The above script is simple enough for non-programmers to
understand, and precise enough to be considered a fully executable program.
Using the PlanOut compiler, this code can be translated into a serialized, JSON-encoded data structure:

```json
{
  "op": "seq",
  "seq": [
    {
      "op": "set",
      "var": "button_text",
      "value": {
        "choices": {
          "op": "array",
          "values": [
            "Purchase",
            "Buy"
          ]
        },
        "unit": {
          "op": "get",
          "var": "userid"
        },
        "op": "uniformChoice"
      }
    },
    {
      "op": "set",
      "var": "has_discount",
      "value": {
        "p": 0.3,
        "unit": {
          "op": "get",
          "var": "userid"
          },
          "op": "bernoulliTrial"
        }
      }
      ]
    }
```

This format can then be executed by a PlanOut interpreter which can be written in
any language.  The result is that no matter what platform you use,
the above code will always map the same subjects to the same treatments.

### Scaling up experimentation using serialized experiment definitions
The PlanOut serialization layer is particularly well suited for organizations
that would like to scale up their experimentation infrastructure.  Having
a JSON-based representation gives developers the ability to centrally manage and
store experiment definitions in a datastore or database. These experimental
scripts may be written in the PlanOut language and compiled to JSON, or generated
via graphical user interfaces.  Once these experiments are defined and named, they
can easily be managed using [Namespaces](/docs/namespaces.html).  This
allows Web services to run parallel non-overlapping experiments and follow-on
experiments in a statistically sound fashion.  All of the functionality
provided by the native Python API described in this guide is fully compatible
with the interpreter.
