---
id: using-the-interpreter
title: Using the PlanOut interpreter
layout: docs
permalink: /docs/using-the-interpreter.html
prev: language.html
next: best-practices.html
---

## Serializing experiments
PlanOut language code gets compiled into a serialized JSON representation
which can be stored and retrieved at runtime.
This aspect is key to scaling up an organization's experimentation infrastructure.

For example, the PlanOut script:

```
button_color = uniformChoice(choices=["#ff0000", "#00ff00"], unit=userid);
button_text = uniformChoice(choices=["I'm voting", "I'm a voter"], unit=userid);
```

is [compiled](http://facebook.github.io/planout/demo/planout-compiler.html) into the following JSON representation:

```json
{
  "op": "seq",
  "seq": [
    {
      "op": "set",
      "var": "button_color",
      "value": {
        "choices": {
          "op": "array",
          "values": [
            "#ff0000",
            "#00ff00"
          ]
        },
        "unit": {
          "op": "get",
          "var": "userid"
        },
        "op": "uniformChoice"
      }
    },
    {
      "op": "set",
      "var": "button_text",
      "value": {
        "choices": {
          "op": "array",
          "values": [
            "I'm voting",
            "I'm a voter"
          ]
        },
        "unit": {
          "op": "get",
          "var": "userid"
        },
        "op": "uniformChoice"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Information about experiments, such as their expected inputs and the
variables they output can be directly parsed from serialized code. This allows
for:

 -  Management interfaces can directly parse PlanOut code to show which columns
  should be exported to data storage systems, like [Presto](http://prestodb.io)
  and [Hive](https://hive.apache.org).

 - Analysis tools can also identify input
  variables from PlanOut scripts before they are run, to, e.g., specify which
  units to bootstrap on. This can be particularly important for ranking
  experiments, where both users and items need to be taken into account for
  when [computing confidence intervals](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1304.7406v3.pdf).

 Serialized PlanOut code is also easy to parse and generate, so it is possible to
 build graphical interfaces to construct simple experimental designs.

# Foo
All variables set by PlanOut code are passed back via `Interpreter.get_params()` and by default, are automatically logged when used in conjunction with `SimpleInterpretedExperiment`.


## Is the PlanOut language right for you?

#### Pros
 - Use of the [limited vocabulary](planout-language.html) means that your experiments are kept simple.
  Because PlanOut is not Turing complete, and each argument takes some optional
  and required parameters specified a priori, it's easy to check that your
  program will run, and not get caught in any loops.

 - Experiment definitions are [serialized](serialization.html),
  so they can easily be stored in databases, sent across networks, and executed
  on multiple platforms, including
  interpreters written in different languages. In fact, the same code that
  executes in the open-source Python version of PlanOut produces the same
  assignments as the PHP version of PlanOut used internally at Facebook.

 - PlanOut language scripts can be analyzed and tested automatically through
  the use of tools, like the PlanOut Edtior.

 - PlanOut language scripts are easier for non-programmers to understand.

 - Experiments can be constructed via graphical interfaces, rather than code.


#### Cons
 - You must use the PlanOut compiler, and/or develop graphical tools to generate
  serialized PlanOut code.

 - Use of the interpreter makes the most sense when you have a database set up
 to store experiment definitions.
